[Music]
the sinking of the Titanic is to this
day one of the worst catastrophes to
come out of a long chain of unfortunate
and untimely events and that chain that
would decide the cruel fate of the great
unsinkable ship started with a tiny key
it seemed like such an insignificant
little thing so trivial that the man who
had had it with him completely forgot to
hand it over to the person who
desperately need it at a critical moment
that man was 37 year-old David Blair and
he was holding the key to the locked
cabinet where all the binoculars for the
lookouts were stored and there's nothing
unusual about the keys being with this
man
because Blair was to be the Titanic
second officer he'd worked on the ship
during all its test runs and up until
she was ready for departure he was
supposed to be on board for the voyage
but as fate would have it just before
the biggest ship of its time was ready
to depart Southampton and head across
the Atlantic to New York City there was
a last-minute change of plans White Star
Line the shipping company that owned the
Titanic decided to replace David Blair
with Henry Wilde the chief officer of
the Titanic's sister ship RMS Olympic
they saw him as a more experienced
Mariner with better skills of running
such large ships Blair wrote in a
postcard to relatives that he was pretty
upset about being replaced in a hurry by
the unexpected change or perhaps because
of this distress Blair forgot to hand
the key to the binocular cabinet over to
officer while it might not seem like
such a big deal but you must remember
that the sonar technology wasn't a thing
at the beginning of the 20th century
that's why binoculars were of vital
importance
because they were the only way to detect
potential dangers early while navigating
soon after the Titanic left the port the
crew realized they wouldn't be able to
open the cabinet but it's not that they
were panicked or anything the lookouts
had sharp eyesight and the ship had been
built and advertised to be unsinkable
after all they were confident that they
could keep watch without the binoculars
perhaps a little too confident
Fred fleet was the lookout on duty that
tragic night the ship sailed its first
and final voyage fleet would end up
surviving the catastrophe and later told
the investigators that if he had had
binoculars he would have noticed the
iceberg earlier and the crew would have
had more time to steer the ship out of
the way now most people would be
thinking how on earth do you not see a
giant iceberg big enough to take down
the Titanic way before the ship is even
close to it
well witnesses say this thing was
sticking out of the water anywhere from
50 to 100 feet in the air and it was
around 200 to 400 feet long it's almost
too big to be a sudden surprise don't
you think well here's where you get more
links in that chain of unfortunate
events that would defeat the unsinkable
yes the huge iceberg could have been
noticed earlier even without binoculars
but perhaps in different conditions you
see it was the middle of the night and
they were in the middle of calm ocean
waters surrounded by nothing but silence
and stark blackness no street or city
lights and more importantly no moon when
you're sailing at night on calm waters
under a moonless sky believe it or not
it results in the worst conditions for
nautical visibility there were no waves
crashing up against the iceberg to give
an audible warning and there was no
moonlight reflecting off the giant hunk
of floating ice to make it sort of glove
essentially this thing really did pop up
of nowhere at least in the look-outs
field a vision not to mention it's
believed that the iceberg had turned
upside down shortly before the collision
and had probably lost more weight on one
side because of melting which would
cause it to flip over this in turn
exposed its lower part which was full of
water and much darker than the upper one
once Fred fleet finally saw at 11:39
p.m. on April 14 1912 and famously
reported iceberg right ahead to the
command bridge it was already too late
they only had about 30 seconds to steer
the ship out of the way and that wasn't
enough for a vessel this size going
almost top speed and that's where we run
into another problem the decision to try
and steer around it first officer
William Murdoch made the call but it
might have been a better idea just to
ram the iceberg head-on surprisingly the
consequences could have been less
dramatic the bow of the ship would have
been crushed and yes part of the crew
and passengers from the front cabins
wouldn't have survived but only two
watertight compartments would have
flooded with that kind of damage the
Titanic could have stayed afloat long
enough for other ships to make it and
save the rest of the passengers and crew
but they had such little time to weigh
the options at 11:40 p.m. the 46
thousand ton ship smashed into the
iceberg in the cold waters of the North
Atlantic her right side scraped 300 feet
along the ice the hull buckled the seams
broke and the water rushed into the
damaged compartments Thomas Andrews the
chief naval architect who designed the
ship and was on board as well confirmed
that the Titanic couldn't be saved the
passengers had to be evacuated
immediately well it was only downhill
from there another cruel twist of fate
is that there was a desperate shortage
of lifeboats with 2224 people on board
and only enough votes to save 1178 lives
the ship was constructed as an
unsinkable one so nobody seriously
believed that the boats were needed at
all on April 15th at 2:20 a.m. the
Titanic sank to the bottom of the ocean
only 706 people survived so whatever
happened to David Blair and that cursed
key well he realized his mistake too
late but he continued to work as a
mariner and even received a bravery
medal from the Royal Humane Society in
1913 for saving a crew member of the
majestic Blair who was first officer on
that ship jumped into the water when the
man fell over the side
although the lifeboats sent to retrieve
him reached the man first Blair was
commended for his selfless act as for
the notorious key for a long time he
kept it as a reminder of the tragedy
he'd miraculously avoided then he passed
it on to his daughter Nancy in 1980 she
gave it to the International sailor
Society but it would be later sold at an
auction held by Henry Aldridge & Son
the auctioneer said that it was one of
the most valued artifacts from the ship
and who'd argue with
this key could have completely changed
history and saved the Titanic had it
been onboard it was sold in 2007 for 78
thousand pounds which would be about a
hundred and thirty-five thousand dollars
by today's Rae this makes this key the
seventh most expensive artifact from the
Titanic on the 100th anniversary of the
sinking they sold a letter written by 33
year old Wallace Henry Hartley a
violinist and the bandleader on the
Titanic he wrote to his relatives that
the ship was great and he liked the guys
from the band he was going to come home
on Sunday the next day after the Titanic
was to arrive in New York he sent the
letter from Queenstown Ireland the last
stop before the doomed ship sailed into
open ocean the letter was sold for
90,000 pounds equivalent to 125,000
dollars today but the most expensive and
no doubt the most exclusive finding is
Hartley's violin he and his band
famously kept playing on deck while the
ship was sinking to calm down the
passengers and help them overcome panic
the brave musicians played up to the
very end and tragically none of them
survived
later newspapers wrote that the
musicians of the Titanic were among the
noblest people in maritime history
Hartley's violin was found almost
immediately after the sinking and the
instrument was given to his fiancee she
had given it to him as a present before
he departed after the tragedy she passed
it on to the British Salvation Army but
for almost 100 years
the violin was thought to be lost until
it reemerged in 2006 when an amateur
musician found it in his parents attic
after that experts spent seven years
examining it and finally announced that
the instrument was authentic it was sold
for a jaw-dropping price of nine hundred
thousand pounds 1.3 million dollars
today most of the people who buy these
sorts of artifacts are Titanic
memorabilia experts and collectors with
the goal of keeping such historical
items safely preserved so that they and
what they remind us of are never
forgotten so now it's your turn
do you think that key could have changed
history
or were there too many untimely
coincidences that seal the Titanic's
fate let me know your thoughts down in
the comments if you learned something
new today then give this video a like
and share with a friend but hey don't go
looking for any more missing keys just
yet we have over two thousand cool
videos for you to check out all you have
to do is pick the left or right video
click on it and enjoy stay on the bright
side of life
[Music]